<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>Chapter Three</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch02.xhtml" title="Chapter Two"/><link rel="next" href="ch04.xhtml" title="Chapter Four"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="Chapter Three" epub:type="chapter" id="id70174353149160"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">Chapter Three</h1></div></div></div><p>Outside, in the garden, it was playtime. Naked in the
warm June sunshine, six or seven hundred little boys and girls were running
with shrill yells over the lawns, or playing ball games, or squatting silently
in twos and threes among the flowering shrubs. The roses were in bloom, two
nightingales soliloquized in the boskage, a cuckoo was just going out of tune
among the lime trees. The air was drowsy with the murmur of bees and
helicopters.</p><p>The Director and his students stood for a short time watching a game of
Centrifugal Bumble–puppy. Twenty children were grouped in a circle round a
chrome steel tower. A ball thrown up so as to land on the platform at the top
of the tower rolled down into the interior, fell on a rapidly revolving disk,
was hurled through one or other of the numerous apertures pierced in the
cylindrical casing, and had to be caught.</p><p>"Strange," mused the Director, as they turned away, "strange to think that
even in Our Ford's day most games were played without more apparatus than a
ball or two and a few sticks and perhaps a bit of netting. imagine the folly
of allowing people to play elaborate games which do nothing whatever to
increase consumption. It's madness. Nowadays the Controllers won't approve of
any new game unless it can be shown that it requires at least as much
apparatus as the most complicated of existing games." He interrupted himself.</p><p>"That's a charming little group," he said, pointing.</p><p>In a little grassy bay between tall clumps of Mediterranean heather, two
children, a little boy of about seven and a little girl who might have been a
year older, were playing, very gravely and with all the focussed attention of
scientists intent on a labour of discovery, a rudimentary sexual game.</p><p>"Charming, charming!" the D.H.C. repeated sentimentally.</p><p>"Charming," the boys politely agreed. But their smile was rather
patronizing. They had put aside similar childish amusements too recently to be
able to watch them now without a touch of contempt. Charming? but it was just
a pair of kids fooling about; that was all. Just kids.</p><p>"I always think," the Director was continuing in the same rather maudlin
tone, when he was interrupted by a loud boo–hooing.</p><p>From a neighbouring shrubbery emerged a nurse, leading by the hand a small
boy, who howled as he went. An anxious–looking little girl trotted at her
heels.</p><p>"What's the matter?" asked the Director.</p><p>The nurse shrugged her shoulders. "Nothing much," she answered. "It's just
that this little boy seems rather reluctant to join in the ordinary erotic
play. I'd noticed it once or twice before. And now again to–day. He started
yelling just now…"</p><p>"Honestly," put in the anxious–looking little girl, "I didn't mean to hurt
him or anything. Honestly."</p><p>"Of course you didn't, dear," said the nurse reassuringly. "And so," she
went on, turning back to the Director, "I'm taking him in to see the Assistant
Superintendent of Psychology. Just to see if anything's at all abnormal."</p><p>"Quite right," said the Director. "Take him in. You stay here, little
girl," he added, as the nurse moved away with her still howling charge.
"What's your name?"</p><p>"Polly Trotsky."</p><p>"And a very good name too," said the Director. "Run away now and see if
you can find some other little boy to play with."</p><p>The child scampered off into the bushes and was lost to sight.</p><p>"Exquisite little creature!" said the Director, looking after her. Then,
turning to his students, "What I'm going to tell you now," he said, "may sound
incredible. But then, when you're not accustomed to history, most facts about
the past <span class="emphasis"><em>do</em></span> sound incredible."</p><p>He let out the amazing truth. For a very long period before the time of
Our Ford, and even for some generations afterwards, erotic play between
children had been regarded as abnormal (there was a roar of laughter); and not
only abnormal, actually immoral (no!): and had therefore been rigorously
suppressed.</p><p>A look of astonished incredulity appeared on the faces of his listeners.
Poor little kids not allowed to amuse themselves? They could not believe it.</p><p>"Even adolescents," the D.H.C. was saying, "even adolescents like
yourselves…"</p><p>"Not possible!"</p><p>"Barring a little surreptitious auto–erotism and homosexuality–absolutely
nothing."</p><p>
      <span class="emphasis"><em>"Nothing?"</em></span>
    </p><p>"In most cases, till they were over twenty years old."</p><p>"Twenty years old?" echoed the students in a chorus of loud disbelief.</p><p>"Twenty," the Director repeated. "I told you that you'd find it
incredible."</p><p>"But what happened?" they asked. "What were the results?"</p><p>"The results were terrible." A deep resonant voice broke startlingly into
the dialogue.</p><p>They looked around. On the fringe of the little group stood a stranger–a
man of middle height, black–haired, with a hooked nose, full red lips, eyes
very piercing and dark. "Terrible," he repeated.</p><p>The D.H.C. had at that moment sat down on one of the steel and rubber
benches conveniently scattered through the gardens; but at the sight of the
stranger, he sprang to his feet and darted forward, his hand outstretched,
smiling with all his teeth, effusive.</p><p>"Controller! What an unexpected pleasure! Boys, what are you thinking of?
This is the Controller; this is his fordship, Mustapha Mond."</p><p>In the four thousand rooms of the Centre the four thousand electric clocks
simultaneously struck four. Discarnate voices called from the trumpet mouths.</p><p>"Main Day–shift off duty. Second Day–shift take over. Main Day–shift off…"</p><p>In the lift, on their way up to the changing rooms, Henry Foster and the
Assistant Director of Predestination rather pointedly turned their backs on
Bernard Marx from the Psychology Bureau: averted themselves from that
unsavoury reputation.</p><p>The faint hum and rattle of machinery still stirred the crimson air in the
Embryo Store. Shifts might come and go, one lupus–coloured face give place to
another; majestically and for ever the conveyors crept forward with their load
of future men and women.</p><p>Lenina Crowne walked briskly towards the door.</p><p>His fordship Mustapha Mond! The eyes of the saluting students almost
popped out of their heads. Mustapha Mond! The Resident Controller for Western
Europe! One of the Ten World Controllers. One of the Ten…and he sat down on
the bench with the D.H.C., he was going to stay, to stay, yes, and actually
talk to them…straight from the horse's mouth. Straight from the mouth of
Ford himself.</p><p>Two shrimp–brown children emerged from a neighbouring shrubbery, stared at
them for a moment with large, astonished eyes, then returned to their
amusements among the leaves.</p><p>"You all remember," said the Controller, in his strong deep voice, "you
all remember, I suppose, that beautiful and inspired saying of Our Ford's:
History is bunk. History," he repeated slowly, "is bunk."</p><p>He waved his hand; and it was as though, with an invisible feather wisk,
he had brushed away a little dust, and the dust was Harappa, was Ur of the
Chaldees; some spider–webs, and they were Thebes and Babylon and Cnossos and
Mycenae. Whisk. Whisk–and where was Odysseus, where was Job, where were
Jupiter and Gotama and Jesus? Whisk–and those specks of antique dirt called
Athens and Rome, Jerusalem and the Middle Kingdom–all were gone. Whisk–the
place where Italy had been was empty. Whisk, the cathedrals; whisk, whisk,
King Lear and the Thoughts of Pascal. Whisk, Passion; whisk, Requiem; whisk,
Symphony; whisk…</p><p>"Going to the Feelies this evening, Henry?" enquired the Assistant
Predestinator. "I hear the new one at the Alhambra is first–rate. There's a
love scene on a bearskin rug; they say it's marvellous. Every hair of the bear
reproduced. The most amazing tactual effects."</p><p>"That's why you're taught no history," the Controller was saying. "But now
the time has come…"</p><p>The D.H.C. looked at him nervously. There were those strange rumours of
old forbidden books hidden in a safe in the Controller's study. Bibles,
poetry–Ford knew what.</p><p>Mustapha Mond intercepted his anxious glance and the corners of his red
lips twitched ironically.</p><p>"It's all right, Director," he said in a tone of faint derision, "I won't
corrupt them."</p><p>The D.H.C. was overwhelmed with confusion.</p><p>Those who feel themselves despised do well to look despising. The smile on
Bernard Marx's face was contemptuous. Every hair on the bear indeed!</p><p>"I shall make a point of going," said Henry Foster.</p><p>Mustapha Mond leaned forward, shook a finger at them. "Just try to realize
it," he said, and his voice sent a strange thrill quivering along their
diaphragms. "Try to realize what it was like to have a viviparous mother."</p><p>That smutty word again. But none of them dreamed, this time, of smiling.</p><p>"Try to imagine what 'living with one's family' meant."</p><p>They tried; but obviously without the smallest success.</p><p>"And do you know what a 'home' was?"</p><p>They shook their heads.</p><p>From her dim crimson cellar Lenina Crowne shot up seventeen stories,
turned to the right as she stepped out of the lift, walked down a long
corridor and, opening the door marked GIRLS' DRESSING–ROOM, plunged into a
deafening chaos of arms and bosoms and underclothing. Torrents of hot water
were splashing into or gurgling out of a hundred baths. Rumbling and hissing,
eighty vibro–vacuum massage machines were simultaneously kneading and sucking
the firm and sunburnt flesh of eighty superb female specimens. Every one was
talking at the top of her voice. A Synthetic Music machine was warbling out a
super–cornet solo.</p><p>"Hullo, Fanny," said Lenina to the young woman who had the pegs and locker
next to hers.</p><p>Fanny worked in the Bottling Room, and her surname was also Crowne. But as
the two thousand million inhabitants of the plant had only ten thousand names
between them, the coincidence was not particularly surprising.</p><p>Lenina pulled at her zippers–downwards on the jacket, downwards with a
double–handed gesture at the two that held trousers, downwards again to loosen
her undergarment. Still wearing her shoes and stockings, she walked off
towards the bathrooms.</p><p>Home, home–a few small rooms, stiflingly over–inhabited by a man, by a
periodically teeming woman, by a rabble of boys and girls of all ages. No air,
no space; an understerilized prison; darkness, disease, and smells.</p><p>(The Controller's evocation was so vivid that one of the boys, more
sensitive than the rest, turned pale at the mere description and was on the
point of being sick.)</p><p>Lenina got out of the bath, toweled herself dry, took hold of a long
flexible tube plugged into the wall, presented the nozzle to her breast, as
though she meant to commit suicide, pressed down the trigger. A blast of
warmed air dusted her with the finest talcum powder. Eight different scents
and eau–de–Cologne were laid on in little taps over the wash–basin. She turned
on the third from the left, dabbed herself with chypre and, carrying her shoes
and stockings in her hand, went out to see if one of the vibro–vacuum machines
were free.</p><p>And home was as squalid psychically as physically. Psychically, it was a
rabbit hole, a midden, hot with the frictions of tightly packed life, reeking
with emotion. What suffocating intimacies, what dangerous, insane, obscene
relationships between the members of the family group! Maniacally, the mother
brooded over her children (<span class="emphasis"><em>her</em></span> children)…brooded over them like a cat
over its kittens; but a cat that could talk, a cat that could say, "My baby,
my baby," over and over again. "My baby, and oh, oh, at my breast, the little
hands, the hunger, and that unspeakable agonizing pleasure! Till at last my
baby sleeps, my baby sleeps with a bubble of white milk at the corner of his
mouth. My little baby sleeps…"</p><p>"Yes," said Mustapha Mond, nodding his head, "you may well shudder."</p><p>"Who are you going out with to–night?" Lenina asked, returning from the
vibro–vac like a pearl illuminated from within, pinkly glowing.</p><p>"Nobody."</p><p>Lenina raised her eyebrows in astonishment.</p><p>"I've been feeling rather out of sorts lately," Fanny explained. "Dr.
Wells advised me to have a Pregnancy Substitute."</p><p>"But, my dear, you're only nineteen. The first Pregnancy Substitute isn't
compulsory till twenty–one."</p><p>"I know, dear. But some people are better if they begin earlier. Dr. Wells
told me that brunettes with wide pelvises, like me, ought to have their first
Pregnancy Substitute at seventeen. So I'm really two years late, not two years
early." She opened the door of her locker and pointed to the row of boxes and
labelled phials on the upper shelf.</p><p>"SYRUP OF CORPUS LUTEUM," Lenina read the names aloud. "OVARIN, GUARANTEED
FRESH: NOT TO BE USED AFTER AUGUST 1ST, A.F. 632. MAMMARY GLAND EXTRACT: TO BE
TAKEN THREE TIMES DAILY, BEFORE MEALS, WITH A LITTLE WATER. PLACENTIN: 5cc TO
BE INJECTED INTRAVENALLY EVERY THIRD DAY…Ugh!" Lenina shuddered. "How I
loathe intravenals, don't you?"</p><p>"Yes. But when they do one good…" Fanny was a particularly sensible girl.</p><p>Our Ford–or Our Freud, as, for some inscrutable reason, he chose to call
himself whenever he spoke of psychological matters–Our Freud had been the
first to reveal the appalling dangers of family life. The world was full of
fathers–was therefore full of misery; full of mothers–therefore of every kind
of perversion from sadism to chastity; full of brothers, sisters, uncles,
aunts–full of madness and suicide.</p><p>"And yet, among the savages of Samoa, in certain islands off the coast of
New Guinea…"</p><p>The tropical sunshine lay like warm honey on the naked bodies of children
tumbling promiscuously among the hibiscus blossoms. Home was in any one of
twenty palm–thatched houses. In the Trobriands conception was the work of</p><p>ancestral ghosts; nobody had ever heard of a father.</p><p>"Extremes," said the Controller, "meet. For the good reason that they were
made to meet."</p><p>"Dr. Wells says that a three months' Pregnancy Substitute now will make
all the difference to my health for the next three or four years."</p><p>"Well, I hope he's right," said Lenina. "But, Fanny, do you really mean to
say that for the next three months you're not supposed to…"</p><p>"Oh no, dear. Only for a week or two, that's all. I shall spend the
evening at the Club playing Musical Bridge. I suppose you're going out?"</p><p>Lenina nodded.</p><p>"Who with?"</p><p>"Henry Foster."</p><p>"Again?" Fanny's kind, rather moon–like face took on an incongruous
expression of pained and disapproving astonishment. "Do you mean to tell me
you're <span class="emphasis"><em>still</em></span> going out with Henry Foster?"</p><p>Mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters. But there were also husbands,
wives, lovers. There were also monogamy and romance.</p><p>"Though you probably don't know what those are," said Mustapha Mond.</p><p>They shook their heads.</p><p>Family, monogamy, romance. Everywhere exclusiveness, a narrow channelling
of impulse and energy.</p><p>"But every one belongs to every one else," he concluded, citing the
hypnopædic proverb.</p><p>The students nodded, emphatically agreeing with a statement which upwards
of sixty–two thousand repetitions in the dark had made them accept, not merely
as true, but as axiomatic, self–evident, utterly indisputable.</p><p>"But after all," Lenina was protesting, "it's only about four months now
since I've been having Henry."</p><p>"Only four months! I like that. And what's more," Fanny went on, pointing
an accusing finger, "there's been nobody else except Henry all that time. Has
there?"</p><p>Lenina blushed scarlet; but her eyes, the tone of her voice remained
defiant. "No, there hasn't been any one else," she answered almost truculently.
"And I jolly well don't see why there should have been."</p><p>"Oh, she jolly well doesn't see why there should have been," Fanny
repeated, as though to an invisible listener behind Lenina's left shoulder.
Then, with a sudden change of tone, "But seriously," she said, "I really do
think you ought to be careful. It's such horribly bad form to go on and on
like this with one man. At forty, or thirty–five, it wouldn't be so bad. But
at <span class="emphasis"><em>your</em></span> age, Lenina! No, it really won't do. And you know how strongly
the D.H.C. objects to anything intense or long–drawn. Four months of Henry
Foster, without having another man–why, he'd be furious if he knew…"</p><p>"Think of water under pressure in a pipe." They thought of it. "I pierce
it once," said the Controller. "What a jet!"</p><p>He pierced it twenty times. There were twenty piddling little fountains.</p><p>"My baby. My baby…!"</p><p>"Mother!" The madness is infectious.</p><p>"My love, my one and only, precious, precious…"</p><p>Mother, monogamy, romance. High spurts the fountain; fierce and foamy the
wild jet. The urge has but a single outlet. My love, my baby. No wonder these
poor pre–moderns were mad and wicked and miserable. Their world didn't allow
them to take things easily, didn't allow them to be sane, virtuous, happy.
What with mothers and lovers, what with the prohibitions they were not
conditioned to obey, what with the temptations and the lonely remorses, what
with all the diseases and the endless isolating pain, what with the
uncertainties and the poverty–they were forced to feel strongly. And feeling
strongly (and strongly, what was more, in solitude, in hopelessly individual
isolation), how could they be stable?</p><p>"Of course there's no need to give him up. Have somebody else from time to
time, that's all. He has other girls, doesn't he?"</p><p>Lenina admitted it.</p><p>"Of course he does. Trust Henry Foster to be the perfect gentleman–always
correct. And then there's the Director to think of. You know what a stickler…"</p><p>Nodding, "He patted me on the behind this afternoon," said Lenina.</p><p>"There, you see!" Fanny was triumphant. "That shows what <span class="emphasis"><em>he</em></span> stands
for. The strictest conventionality."</p><p>"Stability," said the Controller, "stability. No civilization without
social stability. No social stability without individual stability." His voice
was a trumpet. Listening they felt larger, warmer.</p><p>The machine turns, turns and must keep on turning–for ever. It is death if
it stands still. A thousand millions scrabbled the crust of the earth. The
wheels began to turn. In a hundred and fifty years there were two thousand
millions. Stop all the wheels. In a hundred and fifty weeks there are once
more only a thousand millions; a thousand thousand thousand men and women have
starved to death.</p><p>Wheels must turn steadily, but cannot turn untended. There must be men to
tend them, men as steady as the wheels upon their axles, sane men, obedient
men, stable in contentment.</p><p>Crying: My baby, my mother, my only, only love groaning: My sin, my
terrible God; screaming with pain, muttering with fever, bemoaning old age and
poverty–how can they tend the wheels? And if they cannot tend the wheels…The
corpses of a thousand thousand thousand men and women would be hard to bury or
burn.</p><p>"And after all," Fanny's tone was coaxing, "it's not as though there were
anything painful or disagreeable about having one or two men besides Henry.
And seeing that you <span class="emphasis"><em>ought</em></span> to be a little more promiscuous…"</p><p>"Stability," insisted the Controller, "stability. The primal and the
ultimate need. Stability. Hence all this."</p><p>With a wave of his hand he indicated the gardens, the huge building of the
Conditioning Centre, the naked children furtive in the undergrowth or running
across the lawns.</p><p>Lenina shook her head. "Somehow," she mused, "I hadn't been feeling very
keen on promiscuity lately. There are times when one doesn't. Haven't you
found that too, Fanny?"</p><p>Fanny nodded her sympathy and understanding. "But one's got to make the
effort," she said, sententiously, "one's got to play the game. After all,
every one belongs to every one else."</p><p>"Yes, every one belongs to every one else," Lenina repeated slowly and,
sighing, was silent for a moment; then, taking Fanny's hand, gave it a little
squeeze. "You're quite right, Fanny. As usual. I'll make the effort."</p><p>Impulse arrested spills over, and the flood is feeling, the flood is
passion, the flood is even madness: it depends on the force of the current,
the height and strength of the barrier. The unchecked stream flows smoothly
down its appointed channels into a calm well–being. (The embryo is hungry; day
in, day out, the blood–surrogate pump unceasingly turns its eight hundred
revolutions a minute. The decanted infant howls; at once a nurse appears with
a bottle of external secretion. Feeling lurks in that interval of time between
desire and its consummation. Shorten that interval, break down all those old
unnecessary barriers.</p><p>"Fortunate boys!" said the Controller. "No pains have been spared to make
your lives emotionally easy–to preserve you, so far as that is possible, from
having emotions at all."</p><p>"Ford's in his flivver," murmured the D.H.C. "All's well with the world."</p><p>"Lenina Crowne?" said Henry Foster, echoing the Assistant Predestinator's
question as he zipped up his trousers. "Oh, she's a splendid girl. Wonderfully
pneumatic. I'm surprised you haven't had her."</p><p>"I can't think how it is I haven't," said the Assistant Predestinator. "I
certainly will. At the first opportunity."</p><p>From his place on the opposite side of the changing–room aisle, Bernard
Marx overheard what they were saying and turned pale.</p><p>"And to tell the truth," said Lenina, "I'm beginning to get just a tiny
bit bored with nothing but Henry every day." She pulled on her left stocking.
"Do you know Bernard Marx?" she asked in a tone whose excessive casualness was
evidently forced.</p><p>Fanny looked startled. "You don't mean to say…?"</p><p>"Why not? Bernard's an Alpha Plus. Besides, he asked me to go to one of
the Savage Reservations with him. I've always wanted to see a Savage
Reservation."</p><p>"But his reputation?"</p><p>"What do I care about his reputation?"</p><p>"They say he doesn't like Obstacle Golf."</p><p>"They say, they say," mocked Lenina.</p><p>"And then he spends most of his time by himself–alone." There was horror
in Fanny's voice.</p><p>"Well, he won't be alone when he's with me. And anyhow, why are people so
beastly to him? I think he's rather sweet." She smiled to herself; how
absurdly shy he had been! Frightened almost–as though she were a World
Controller and he a Gamma–Minus machine minder.</p><p>"Consider your own lives," said Mustapha Mond. "Has any of you ever
encountered an insurmountable obstacle?"</p><p>The question was answered by a negative silence.</p><p>"Has any of you been compelled to live through a long time–interval
between the consciousness of a desire and its fufilment?"</p><p>"Well," began one of the boys, and hesitated.</p><p>"Speak up," said the D.H.C. "Don't keep his fordship waiting."</p><p>"I once had to wait nearly four weeks before a girl I wanted would let me
have her."</p><p>"And you felt a strong emotion in consequence?"</p><p>"Horrible!"</p><p>"Horrible; precisely," said the Controller. "Our ancestors were so stupid
and short–sighted that when the first reformers came along and offered to
deliver them from those horrible emotions, they wouldn't have anything to do
with them."</p><p>"Talking about her as though she were a bit of meat." Bernard ground his
teeth. "Have her here, have her there." Like mutton. Degrading her to so much
mutton. She said she'd think it over, she said she'd give me an answer this
week. Oh, Ford, Ford, Ford." He would have liked to go up to them and hit them
in the face–hard, again and again.</p><p>"Yes, I really do advise you to try her," Henry Foster was saying.</p><p>"Take Ectogenesis. Pfitzner and Kawaguchi had got the whole technique
worked out. But would the Governments look at it? No. There was something
called Christianity. Women were forced to go on being viviparous."</p><p>"He's so ugly!" said Fanny.</p><p>"But I rather like his looks."</p><p>"And then so <span class="emphasis"><em>small</em></span>." Fanny made a grimace; smallness was so
horribly and typically low–caste.</p><p>"I think that's rather sweet," said Lenina. "One feels one would like to
pet him. You know. Like a cat."</p><p>Fanny was shocked. "They say somebody made a mistake when he was still in
the bottle–thought he was a Gamma and put alcohol into his blood–surrogate.
That's why he's so stunted."</p><p>"What nonsense!" Lenina was indignant.</p><p>"Sleep teaching was actually prohibited in England. There was something
called liberalism. Parliament, if you know what that was, passed a law against
it. The records survive. Speeches about liberty of the subject. Liberty to be
inefficient and miserable. Freedom to be a round peg in a square hole."</p><p>"But, my dear chap, you're welcome, I assure you. You're welcome." Henry
Foster patted the Assistant Predestinator on the shoulder. "Every one belongs
to every one else, after all."</p><p>One hundred repetitions three nights a week for four years, thought
Bernard Marx, who was a specialist on hypnopædia. Sixty–two thousand four
hundred repetitions make one truth. Idiots!</p><p>"Or the Caste System. Constantly proposed, constantly rejected. There was
something called democracy. As though men were more than physico–chemically
equal."</p><p>"Well, all I can say is that I'm going to accept his invitation."</p><p>Bernard hated them, hated them. But they were two, they were large, they
were strong.</p><p>"The Nine Years' War began in A.F. 141."</p><p>"Not even if it <span class="emphasis"><em>were</em></span> true about the alcohol in his
blood–surrogate."</p><p>"Phosgene, chloropicrin, ethyl iodoacetate, diphenylcyanarsine,
trichlormethyl, chloroformate, dichlorethyl sulphide. Not to mention
hydrocyanic acid."</p><p>"Which I simply don't believe," Lenina concluded.</p><p>"The noise of fourteen thousand aeroplanes advancing in open order. But in
the Kurfurstendamm and the Eighth Arrondissement, the explosion of the anthrax
bombs is hardly louder than the popping of a paper bag."</p><p>"Because I <span class="emphasis"><em>do</em></span> want to see a Savage Reservation."</p><p>Ch3C6H2(NO2)3 + Hg(CNO)2 = well, what? An enormous hole in the ground, a pile of
masonry, some bits of flesh and mucus, a foot, with the boot still on it,
flying through the air and landing, flop, in the middle of the geraniums–the
scarlet ones; such a splendid show that summer!</p><p>"You're hopeless, Lenina, I give you up."</p><p>"The Russian technique for infecting water supplies was particularly
ingenious."</p><p>Back turned to back, Fanny and Lenina continued their changing in silence.</p><p>"The Nine Years' War, the great Economic Collapse. There was a choice
between World Control and destruction. Between stability and…"</p><p>"Fanny Crowne's a nice girl too," said the Assistant Predestinator.</p><p>In the nurseries, the Elementary Class Consciousness lesson was over, the
voices were adapting future demand to future industrial supply. "I do love
flying," they whispered, "I do love flying, I do love having new clothes, I do
love…"</p><p>"Liberalism, of course, was dead of anthrax, but all the same you couldn't
do things by force."</p><p>"Not nearly so pneumatic as Lenina. Oh, not nearly."</p><p>"But old clothes are beastly," continued the untiring whisper. "We
always throw away old clothes. Ending is better than mending, ending is better
than mending, ending is better…"</p><p>"Government's an affair of sitting, not hitting. You rule with the brains
and the buttocks, never with the fists. For example, there was the
conscription of consumption."</p><p>"There, I'm ready," said Lenina, but Fanny remained speechless and
averted. "Let's make peace, Fanny darling."</p><p>"Every man, woman and child compelled to consume so much a year. In the
interests of industry. The sole result…"</p><p>"Ending is better than mending. The more stitches, the less riches; the
more stitches…"</p><p>"One of these days," said Fanny, with dismal emphasis, "you'll get into
trouble."</p><p>"Conscientious objection on an enormous scale. Anything not to consume.
Back to nature."</p><p>"I do love flying. I do love flying."</p><p>"Back to culture. Yes, actually to culture. You can't consume much if you
sit still and read books."</p><p>"Do I look all right?" Lenina asked. Her jacket was made of bottle green
acetate cloth with green viscose fur; at the cuffs and collar.</p><p>"Eight hundred Simple Lifers were mowed down by machine guns at Golders
Green."</p><p>"Ending is better than mending, ending is better than mending."</p><p>Green corduroy shorts and white viscose–woollen stockings turned down
below the knee.</p><p>"Then came the famous British Museum Massacre. Two thousand culture fans
gassed with dichlorethyl sulphide."</p><p>A green–and–white jockey cap shaded Lenina's eyes; her shoes were bright
green and highly polished.</p><p>"In the end," said Mustapha Mond, "the Controllers realized that force was
no good. The slower but infinitely surer methods of ectogenesis, neo–Pavlovian
conditioning and hypnopædia…"</p><p>And round her waist she wore a silver–mounted green morocco–surrogate
cartridge belt, bulging (for Lenina was not a freemartin) with the regulation
supply of contraceptives.</p><p>"The discoveries of Pfitzner and Kawaguchi were at last made use of. An
intensive propaganda against viviparous reproduction…"</p><p>"Perfect!" cried Fanny enthusiastically. She could never resist Lenina's
charm for long. "And what a perfectly <span class="emphasis"><em>sweet</em></span> Malthusian belt!"</p><p>"Accompanied by a campaign against the Past; by the closing of museums,
the blowing up of historical monuments (luckily most of them had already been
destroyed during the Nine Years' War); by the suppression of all books
published before A.F. 15O."</p><p>"I simply must get one like it," said Fanny.</p><p>"There were some things called the pyramids, for example.</p><p>"My old black–patent bandolier…"</p><p>"And a man called Shakespeare. You've never heard of them of course."</p><p>"It's an absolute disgrace–that bandolier of mine."</p><p>"Such are the advantages of a really scientific education."</p><p>"The more stitches the less riches; the more stitches the less…"</p><p>"The introduction of Our Ford's first T–Model…"</p><p>"I've had it nearly three months."</p><p>"Chosen as the opening date of the new era."</p><p>"Ending is better than mending; ending is better…"</p><p>"There was a thing, as I've said before, called Christianity."</p><p>"Ending is better than mending."</p><p>"The ethics and philosophy of under–consumption…"</p><p>"I love new clothes, I love new clothes, I love…"</p><p>"So essential when there was under–production; but in an age of machines
and the fixation of nitrogen–positively a crime against society."</p><p>"Henry Foster gave it me."</p><p>"All crosses had their tops cut and became T's. There was also a thing
called God."</p><p>"It's real morocco–surrogate."</p><p>"We have the World State now. And Ford's Day celebrations, and Community
Sings, and Solidarity Services."</p><p>"Ford, how I hate them!" Bernard Marx was thinking.</p><p>"There was a thing called Heaven; but all the same they used to drink
enormous quantities of alcohol."</p><p>"Like meat, like so much meat."</p><p>"There was a thing called the soul and a thing called immortality."</p><p>"Do ask Henry where he got it."</p><p>"But they used to take morphia and cocaine."</p><p>"And what makes it worse, she thinks of herself as meat."</p><p>"Two thousand pharmacologists and bio–chemists were subsidized in A.P. 178."</p><p>"He does look glum," said the Assistant Predestinator, pointing at Bernard
Marx.</p><p>"Six years later it was being produced commercially. The perfect drug."</p><p>"Let's bait him."</p><p>"Euphoric, narcotic, pleasantly hallucinant."</p><p>"Glum, Marx, glum." The clap on the shoulder made him start, look up. It
was that brute Henry Foster. "What you need is a gramme of <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>."</p><p>"All the advantages of Christianity and alcohol; none of their defects."</p><p>"Ford, I should like to kill him!" But all he did was to say, "No, thank
you," and fend off the proffered tube of tablets.</p><p>"Take a holiday from reality whenever you like, and come back without so
much as a headache or a mythology."</p><p>"Take it," insisted Henry Foster, "take it."</p><p>"Stability was practically assured."</p><p>"One cubic centimetre cures ten gloomy sentiments," said the Assistant
Predestinator citing a piece of homely hypnopædic wisdom.</p><p>"It only remained to conquer old age."</p><p>"Damn you, damn you!" shouted Bernard Marx.</p><p>"Hoity–toity."</p><p>"Gonadal hormones, transfusion of young blood, magnesium salts…"</p><p>"And do remember that a gramme is better than a damn." They went out,
laughing.</p><p>"All the physiological stigmata of old age have been abolished. And along
with them, of course…"</p><p>"Don't forget to ask him about that Malthusian belt," said Fanny.</p><p>"Along with them all the old man's mental peculiarities. Characters remain
constant throughout a whole lifetime."</p><p>"…two rounds of Obstacle Golf to get through before dark. I must fly."</p><p>"Work, play–at sixty our powers and tastes are what they were at
seventeen. Old men in the bad old days used to renounce, retire, take to
religion, spend their time reading, thinking–<span class="emphasis"><em>thinking!</em></span>"</p><p>"Idiots, swine!" Bernard Marx was saying to himself, as he walked down the
corridor to the lift.</p><p>"Now–such is progress–the old men work, the old men copulate, the old men
have no time, no leisure from pleasure, not a moment to sit down and think–or
if ever by some unlucky chance such a crevice of time should yawn in the solid
substance of their distractions, there is always <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>, delicious
<span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>, half a gramme for a half–holiday, a gramme for a week–end, two
grammes for a trip to the gorgeous East, three for a dark eternity on the
moon; returning whence they find themselves on the other side of the crevice,
safe on the solid ground of daily labour and distraction, scampering from
feely to feely, from girl to pneumatic girl, from Electromagnetic Golf course
to…"</p><p>"Go away, little girl," shouted the D.H.C. angrily. "Go away, little boy!
Can't you see that his fordship's busy? Go and do your erotic play somewhere
else."</p><p>"Suffer little children," said the Controller.</p><p>Slowly, majestically, with a faint humming of machinery, the Conveyors
moved forward, thirty–three centimters an hour. In the red darkness glinted
innumerable rubies.</p></section><footer/></body></html>