<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>§ 1</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch04.xhtml" title="Chapter Four"/><link rel="next" href="ch04s02.xhtml" title="§ 2"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="§ 1" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70174353113200"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">§ 1</h2></div></div></div><p>The lift was crowded with men from the Alpha Changing
Rooms, and Lenina's entry was greeted by many friendly nods and smiles. She
was a popular girl and, at one time or another, had spent a night with almost
all of them.</p><p>They were dear boys, she thought, as she returned their salutations.
Charming boys! Still, she did wish that George Edzel's ears weren't quite so
big (perhaps he'd been given just a spot too much parathyroid at Metre 328?).
And looking at Benito Hoover, she couldn't help remembering that he was really
<span class="emphasis"><em>too</em></span> hairy when he took his clothes off.</p><p>Turning, with eyes a little saddened by the recollection, of Benito's
curly blackness, she saw in a corner the small thin body, the melancholy face
of Bernard Marx.</p><p>"Bernard!" she stepped up to him. "I was looking for you." Her voice rang
clear above the hum of the mounting lift. The others looked round curiously.
"I wanted to talk to you about our New Mexico plan." Out of the tail of her
eye she could see Benito Hoover gaping with astonishment. The gape annoyed
her. "Surprised I shouldn't be begging to go with <span class="emphasis"><em>him</em></span> again!" she said
to herself. Then aloud, and more warmly than ever, "I'd simply <span class="emphasis"><em>love</em></span> to
come with you for a week in July," she went on. (Anyhow, she was publicly
proving her unfaithfulness to Henry. Fanny ought to be pleased, even though it
was Bernard.) "That is," Lenina gave him her most deliciously significant
smile, "if you still want to have me."</p><p>Bernard's pale face flushed. "What on earth for?" she wondered,
astonished, but at the same time touched by this strange tribute to her power.</p><p>"Hadn't we better talk about it somewhere else?" he stammered, looking
horribly uncomfortable.</p><p>"As though I'd been saying something shocking," thought Lenina. "He
couldn't look more upset if I'd made a dirty joke–asked him who his mother
was, or something like that."</p><p>"I mean, with all these people about…" He was choked with confusion.</p><p>Lenina's laugh was frank and wholly unmalicious. "How funny you are!" she
said; and she quite genuinely did think him funny. "You'll give me at least a
week's warning, won't you," she went on in another tone. "I suppose we take
the Blue Pacific Rocket? Does it start from the Charing–T Tower? Or is it from
Hampstead?"</p><p>Before Bernard could answer, the lift came to a standstill.</p><p>"Roof!" called a creaking voice.</p><p>The liftman was a small simian creature, dressed in the black tunic of an
Epsilon–Minus Semi–Moron.</p><p>"Roof!"</p><p>He flung open the gates. The warm glory of afternoon sunlight made him
start and blink his eyes. "Oh, roof!" he repeated in a voice of rapture. He
was as though suddenly and joyfully awakened from a dark annihilating stupor.
"Roof!"</p><p>He smiled up with a kind of doggily expectant adoration into the faces of
his passengers. Talking and laughing together, they stepped out into the
light. The liftman looked after them.</p><p>"Roof?" he said once more, questioningly.</p><p>Then a bell rang, and from the ceiling of the lift a loud speaker began,
very softly and yet very imperiously, to issue its commands.</p><p>"Go down," it said, "go down. Floor Eighteen. Go down, go down. Floor
Eighteen. Go down, go…"</p><p>The liftman slammed the gates, touched a button and instantly dropped back
into the droning twilight of the well, the twilight of his own habitual
stupor.</p><p>It was warm and bright on the roof. The summer afternoon was drowsy with
the hum of passing helicopters; and the deeper drone of the rocket–planes
hastening, invisible, through the bright sky five or six miles overhead was
like a caress on the soft air. Bernard Marx drew a deep breath. He looked up
into the sky and round the blue horizon and finally down into Lenina's face.</p><p>"Isn't it beautiful!" His voice trembled a little.</p><p>She smiled at him with an expression of the most sympathetic
understanding. "Simply perfect for Obstacle Golf," she answered rapturously.
"And now I must fly, Bernard. Henry gets cross if I keep him waiting. Let me
know in good time about the date." And waving her hand she ran away across the
wide flat roof towards the hangars. Bernard stood watching the retreating
twinkle of the white stockings, the sunburnt knees vivaciously bending and
unbending again, again, and the softer rolling of those well–fitted corduroy
shorts beneath the bottle green jacket. His face wore an expression of pain.</p><p>"I should say she was pretty," said a loud and cheery voice just behind
him.</p><p>Bernard started and looked around. The chubby red face of Benito Hoover
was beaming down at him–beaming with manifest cordiality. Benito was
notoriously good–natured. People said of him that he could have got through
life without ever touching <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>. The malice and bad tempers from which
other people had to take holidays never afflicted him. Reality for Benito was
always sunny.</p><p>"Pneumatic too. And how!" Then, in another tone: "But, I say," he went on,
"you do look glum! What you need is a gramme of <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>." Diving into his
right–hand trouser–pocket, Benito produced a phial. "One cubic centimetre
cures ten gloomy…But, I say!"</p><p>Bernard had suddenly turned and rushed away.</p><p>Benito stared after him. "What can be the matter with the fellow?" he
wondered, and, shaking his head, decided that the story about the alcohol
having been put into the poor chap's blood–surrogate must be true. "Touched
his brain, I suppose."</p><p>He put away the <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span> bottle, and taking out a packet of sex–hormone
chewing–gum, stuffed a plug into his cheek and walked slowly away towards the
hangars, ruminating.</p><p>Henry Foster had had his machine wheeled out of its lock–up and, when
Lenina arrived, was already seated in the cockpit, waiting.</p><p>"Four minutes late," was all his comment, as she climbed in beside him. He
started the engines and threw the helicopter screws into gear. The machine
shot vertically into the air. Henry accelerated; the humming of the propeller
shrilled from hornet to wasp, from wasp to mosquito; the speedometer showed
that they were rising at the best part of two kilometres a minute. London
diminished beneath them. The huge table–topped buildings were no more, in a
few seconds, than a bed of geometrical mushrooms sprouting from the green of
park and garden. In the midst of them, thin–stalked, a taller, slenderer
fungus, the Charing–T Tower lifted towards the sky a disk of shining concrete.</p><p>Like the vague torsos of fabulous athletes, huge fleshy clouds lolled on
the blue air above their heads. Out of one of them suddenly dropped a small
scarlet insect, buzzing as it fell.</p><p>"There's the Red Rocket," said Henry, "just come in from New York."
Looking at his watch. "Seven minutes behind time," he added, and shook his
head. "These Atlantic services–they're really scandalously unpunctual."</p><p>He took his foot off the accelerator. The humming of the screws overhead
dropped an octave and a half, back through wasp and hornet to bumble bee, to
cockchafer, to stag–beetle. The upward rush of the machine slackened off; a
moment later they were hanging motionless in the air. Henry pushed at a lever;
there was a click. Slowly at first, then faster and faster, till it was a
circular mist before their eyes, the propeller in front of them began to
revolve. The wind of a horizontal speed whistled ever more shrilly in the
stays. Henry kept his eye on the revolution–counter; when the needle touched
the twelve hundred mark, he threw the helicopter screws out of gear. The
machine had enough forward momentum to be able to fly on its planes.</p><p>Lenina looked down through the window in the floor between her feet. They
were flying over the six kilometre zone of park–land that separated Central
London from its first ring of satellite suburbs. The green was maggoty with
fore–shortened life. Forests of Centrifugal Bumble–puppy towers gleamed
between the trees. Near Shepherd's Bush two thousand Beta–Minus mixed doubles
were playing Riemann–surface tennis. A double row of Escalator Fives Courts
lined the main road from Notting Hill to Willesden. In the Ealing stadium a
Delta gymnastic display and community sing was in progress.</p><p>"What a hideous colour khaki is," remarked Lenina, voicing the hypnopædic
prejudices of her caste.</p><p>The buildings of the Hounslow Feely Studio covered seven and a half
hectares. Near them a black and khaki army of labourers was busy revitrifying
the surface of the Great West Road. One of the huge travelling crucibles was
being tapped as they flew over. The molten stone poured out in a stream of
dazzling incandescence across the road, the asbestos rollers came and went; at
the tail of an insulated watering cart the steam rose in white clouds.</p><p>At Brentford the Television Corporation's factory was like a small town.</p><p>"They must be changing the shift," said Lenina.</p><p>Like aphides and ants, the leaf–green Gamma girls, the black Semi–Morons
swarmed round the entrances, or stood in queues to take their places in the
monorail tram–cars. Mulberry–coloured Beta–Minuses came and went among the
crowd. The roof of the main building was alive with the alighting and
departure of helicopters.</p><p>"My word," said Lenina, "I'm glad I'm not a Gamma."</p><p>Ten minutes later they were at Stoke Poges and had started their first
round of Obstacle Golf.</p></section><footer/></body></html>