<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>§ 1</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch05.xhtml" title="Chapter Five"/><link rel="next" href="ch05s02.xhtml" title="§ 2"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="§ 1" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70174353066580"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">§ 1</h2></div></div></div><p>By eight o'clock the light was failing. The loud
speaker in the tower of the Stoke Poges Club House began, in a more than human
tenor, to announce the closing of the courses. Lenina and Henry abandoned
their game and walked back towards the Club. From the grounds of the Internal
and External Secretion Trust came the lowing of those thousands of cattle
which provided, with their hormones and their milk, the raw materials for the
great factory at Farnham Royal.</p><p>An incessant buzzing of helicopters filled the twilight. Every two and a
half minutes a bell and the screech of whistles announced the departure of one
of the light monorail trains which carried the lower caste golfers back from
their separate course to the metropolis.</p><p>Lenina and Henry climbed into their machine and started off. At eight
hundred feet Henry slowed down the helicopter screws, and they hung for a
minute or two poised above the fading landscape. The forest of Burnham Beeches
stretched like a great pool of darkness towards the bright shore of the
western sky. Crimson at the horizon, the last of the sunset faded, through
orange, upwards into yellow and a pale watery green. Northwards, beyond and
above the trees, the Internal and External Secretions factory glared with a
fierce electric brilliance from every window of its twenty stories. Beneath
them lay the buildings of the Golf Club–the huge Lower Caste barracks and, on
the other side of a dividing wall, the smaller houses reserved for Alpha and
Beta members. The approaches to the monorail station were black with the
ant–like pullulation of lower–caste activity. From under the glass vault a
lighted train shot out into the open. Following its southeasterly course
across the dark plain their eyes were drawn to the majestic buildings of the
Slough Crematorium. For the safety of night–flying planes, its four tall
chimneys were flood–lighted and tipped with crimson danger signals. It was a
landmark.</p><p>"Why do the smoke–stacks have those things like balconies around them?"
enquired Lenina.</p><p>"Phosphorus recovery," explained Henry telegraphically. "On their way up
the chimney the gases go through four separate treatments.
P2O5 used to go right out of circulation every time they
cremated some one. Now they recover over ninety–eight per cent of it. More
than a kilo and a half per adult corpse. Which makes the best part of four
hundred tons of phosphorus every year from England alone." Henry spoke with a
happy pride, rejoicing whole–heartedly in the achievement, as though it had
been his own. "Fine to think we can go on being socially useful even after
we're dead. Making plants grow."</p><p>Lenina, meanwhile, had turned her eyes away and was looking
perpendicularly downwards at the monorail station. "Fine," she agreed. "But
queer that Alphas and Betas won't make any more plants grow than those nasty
little Gammas and Deltas and Epsilons down there."</p><p>"All men are physico–chemically equal," said Henry sententiously.
"Besides, even Epsilons perform indispensable services."</p><p>"Even an Epsilon…" Lenina suddenly remembered an occasion when, as a
little girl at school, she had woken up in the middle of the night and become
aware, for the first time, of the whispering that had haunted all her sleeps.
She saw again the beam of moonlight, the row of small white beds; heard once
more the soft, soft voice that said (the words were there, unforgotten,
unforgettable after so many night–long repetitions): "Every one works for
every one else. We can't do without any one. Even Epsilons are useful. We
couldn't do without Epsilons. Every one works for every one else. We can't do
without any one…" Lenina remembered her first shock of fear and surprise; her
speculations through half a wakeful hour; and then, under the influence of
those endless repetitions, the gradual soothing of her mind, the soothing, the
smoothing, the stealthy creeping of sleep….</p><p>"I suppose Epsilons don't really mind being Epsilons," she said aloud.</p><p>"Of course they don't. How can they? They don't know what it's like being
anything else. We'd mind, of course. But then we've been differently
conditioned. Besides, we start with a different heredity."</p><p>"I'm glad I'm not an Epsilon," said Lenina, with conviction.</p><p>"And if you were an Epsilon," said Henry, "your conditioning would have
made you no less thankful that you weren't a Beta or an Alpha." He put his
forward propeller into gear and headed the machine towards London. Behind
them, in the west, the crimson and orange were almost faded; a dark bank of
cloud had crept into the zenith. As they flew over the crematorium, the plane
shot upwards on the column of hot air rising from the chimneys, only to fall
as suddenly when it passed into the descending chill beyond.</p><p>"What a marvellous switchback!" Lenina laughed delightedly.</p><p>But Henry's tone was almost, for a moment, melancholy. "Do you know what
that switchback was?" he said. "It was some human being finally and definitely
disappearing. Going up in a squirt of hot gas. It would be curious to know who
it was–a man or a woman, an Alpha or an Epsilon…." He sighed. Then, in a
resolutely cheerful voice, "Anyhow," he concluded, "there's one thing we can
be certain of; whoever he may have been, he was happy when he was alive.
Everybody's happy now."</p><p>"Yes, everybody's happy now," echoed Lenina. They had heard the words
repeated a hundred and fifty times every night for twelve years.</p><p>Landing on the roof of Henry's forty–story apartment house in Westminster,
they went straight down to the dining–hall. There, in a loud and cheerful
company, they ate an excellent meal. <span class="emphasis"><em>Soma</em></span> was served with the coffee.
Lenina took two half–gramme tablets and Henry three. At twenty past nine they
walked across the street to the newly opened Westminster Abbey Cabaret. It was
a night almost without clouds, moonless and starry; but of this on the whole
depressing fact Lenina and Henry were fortunately unaware. The electric
sky–signs effectively shut off the outer darkness. "CALVIN STOPES AND HIS
SIXTEEN SEXOPHONISTS." From the façade of the new Abbey the giant letters
invitingly glared. "LONDON'S FINEST SCENT AND COLOUR ORGAN. ALL THE LATEST
SYNTHETIC MUSIC."</p><p>They entered. The air seemed hot and somehow breathless with the scent of
ambergris and sandalwood. On the domed ceiling of the hall, the colour organ
had momentarily painted a tropical sunset. The Sixteen Sexophonists were
playing an old favourite: "There ain't no Bottle in all the world like that
dear little Bottle of mine." Four hundred couples were five–stepping round the
polished floor. Lenina and Henry were soon the four hundred and first. The
saxophones wailed like melodious cats under the moon, moaned in the alto and
tenor registers as though the little death were upon them. Rich with a wealth
of harmonics, their tremulous chorus mounted towards a climax, louder and ever
louder–until at last, with a wave of his hand, the conductor let loose the
final shattering note of ether–music and blew the sixteen merely human blowers
clean out of existence. Thunder in A flat major. And then, in all but silence,
in all but darkness, there followed a gradual deturgescence, a
<span class="emphasis"><em>diminuendo</em></span> sliding gradually, through quarter tones, down, down to a
faintly whispered dominant chord that lingered on (while the five–four rhythms
still pulsed below) charging the darkened seconds with an intense expectancy.
And at last expectancy was fulfilled. There was a sudden explosive sunrise,
and simultaneously, the Sixteen burst into song:</p><table style="border: 0; " class="simplelist" epub:type="list"><tr><td>Bottle of mine, it's you I've always wanted!</td></tr><tr><td>Bottle of mine, why was I ever decanted?</td></tr><tr><td>Skies are blue inside of you,</td></tr><tr><td>The weather's always fine;</td></tr><tr><td>For</td></tr><tr><td>There ain't no Bottle in all the world</td></tr><tr><td>Like that dear little Bottle of mine.</td></tr></table><p>Five–stepping with the other four hundred round and round Westminster
Abbey, Lenina and Henry were yet dancing in another world–the warm, the richly
coloured, the infinitely friendly world of <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>–holiday. How kind, how
good–looking, how delightfully amusing every one was! "Bottle of mine, it's
you I've always wanted…" But Lenina and Henry had what they wanted…They
were inside, here and now–safely inside with the fine weather, the perennially
blue sky. And when, exhausted, the Sixteen had laid by their saxophones and
the Synthetic Music apparatus was producing the very latest in slow Malthusian
Blues, they might have been twin embryos gently rocking together on the waves
of a bottled ocean of blood–surrogate.</p><p>"Good–night, dear friends. Good–night, dear friends." The loud speakers
veiled their commands in a genial and musical politeness. "Good–night, dear
friends…"</p><p>Obediently, with all the others, Lenina and Henry left the building. The
depressing stars had travelled quite some way across the heavens. But though
the separating screen of the sky–signs had now to a great extent dissolved,
the two young people still retained their happy ignorance of the night.</p><p>Swallowing half an hour before closing time, that second dose of
<span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span> had raised a quite impenetrable wall between the actual universe
and their minds. Bottled, they crossed the street; bottled, they took the lift
up to Henry's room on the twenty–eighth floor. And yet, bottled as she was,
and in spite of that second gramme of <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>, Lenina did not forget to
take all the contraceptive precautions prescribed by the regulations. Years of
intensive hypnopædia and, from twelve to seventeen, Malthusian drill three
times a week had made the taking of these precautions almost as automatic and
inevitable as blinking.</p><p>"Oh, and that reminds me," she said, as she came back from the bathroom,
"Fanny Crowne wants to know where you found that lovely green
morocco–surrogate cartridge belt you gave me."</p></section><footer/></body></html>