<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>§ 2</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch06s01.xhtml" title="§ 1"/><link rel="next" href="ch06s03.xhtml" title="§ 3"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="§ 2" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70174352968080"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">§ 2</h2></div></div></div><p>Halting for a moment outside the door of the Director's
room, Bernard drew a deep breath and squared his shoulders, bracing himself to
meet the dislike and disapproval which he was certain of finding within. He
knocked and entered.</p><p>"A permit for you to initial, Director," he said as airily as possible,
and laid the paper on the writing–table.</p><p>The Director glanced at him sourly. But the stamp of the World
Controller's Office was at the head of the paper and the signature of Mustapha
Mond, bold and black, across the bottom. Everything was perfectly in order.
The director had no choice. He pencilled his initials–two small pale letters
abject at the feet of Mustapha Mond–and was about to return the paper without
a word of comment or genial Ford–speed, when his eye was caught by something
written in the body of the permit.</p><p>"For the New Mexican Reservation?" he said, and his tone, the face he
lifted to Bernard, expressed a kind of agitated astonishment.</p><p>Surprised by his surprise, Bernard nodded. There was a silence.</p><p>The Director leaned back in his chair, frowning. "How long ago was it?" he
said, speaking more to himself than to Bernard. "Twenty years, I suppose.
Nearer twenty–five. I must have been your age…" He sighed and shook his head.</p><p>Bernard felt extremely uncomfortable. A man so conventional, so
scrupulously correct as the Director–and to commit so gross a solecism! lt
made him want to hide his face, to run out of the room. Not that he himself
saw anything intrinsically objectionable in people talking about the remote
past; that was one of those hypnopædic prejudices he had (so he imagined)
completely got rid of. What made him feel shy was the knowledge that the
Director disapproved–disapproved and yet had been betrayed into doing the
forbidden thing. Under what inward compulsion? Through his discomfort Bernard
eagerly listened.</p><p>"I had the same idea as you," the Director was saying. "Wanted to have a
look at the savages. Got a permit for New Mexico and went there for my summer
holiday. With the girl I was having at the moment. She was a Beta–Minus, and I
think" (he shut his eyes), "I think she had yellow hair. Anyhow she was
pneumatic, particularly pneumatic; I remember that. Well, we went there, and
we looked at the savages, and we rode about on horses and all that. And
then–it was almost the last day of my leave–then…well, she got lost. We'd
gone riding up one of those revolting mountains, and it was horribly hot and
oppressive, and after lunch we went to sleep. Or at least I did. She must have
gone for a walk, alone. At any rate, when I woke up, she wasn't there. And the
most frightful thunderstorm I've ever seen was just bursting on us. And it
poured and roared and flashed; and the horses broke loose and ran away; and I
fell down, trying to catch them, and hurt my knee, so that I could hardly
walk. Still, I searched and I shouted and I searched. But there was no sign of
her. Then I thought she must have gone back to the rest–house by herself. So I
crawled down into the valley by the way we had come. My knee was agonizingly
painful, and I'd lost my <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>. It took me hours. I didn't get back to
the rest–house till after midnight. And she wasn't there; she wasn't there,"
the Director repeated. There was a silence. "Well," he resumed at last, "the
next day there was a search. But we couldn't find her. She must have fallen
into a gully somewhere; or been eaten by a mountain lion. Ford knows. Anyhow
it was horrible. It upset me very much at the time. More than it ought to have
done, I dare say. Because, after all, it's the sort of accident that might
have happened to any one; and, of course, the social body persists although
the component cells may change." But this sleep–taught consolation did not
seem to be very effective. Shaking his head, "I actually dream about it
sometimes," the Director went on in a low voice. "Dream of being woken up by
that peal of thunder and finding her gone; dream of searching and searching
for her under the trees." He lapsed into the silence of reminiscence.</p><p>"You must have had a terrible shock," said Bernard, almost enviously.</p><p>At the sound of his voice the Director started into a guilty realization
of where he was; shot a glance at Bernard, and averting his eyes, blushed
darkly; looked at him again with sudden suspicion and, angrily on his dignity,
"Don't imagine," he said, "that I'd had any indecorous relation with the girl.
Nothing emotional, nothing long–drawn. It was all perfectly healthy and
normal." He handed Bernard the permit. "I really don't know why I bored you
with this trivial anecdote." Furious with himself for having given away a
discreditable secret, he vented his rage on Bernard. The look in his eyes was
now frankly malignant. "And I should like to take this opportunity, Mr. Marx,"
he went on, "of saying that I'm not at all pleased with the reports I receive
of your behaviour outside working hours. You may say that this is not my
business. But it is. I have the good name of the Centre to think of. My
workers must be above suspicion, particularly those of the highest castes.
Alphas are so conditioned that they do not <span class="emphasis"><em>have</em></span> to be infantile in
their emotional behaviour. But that is all the more reason for their making a
special effort to conform. lt is their duty to be infantile, even against
their inclination. And so, Mr. Marx, I give you fair warning." The Director's
voice vibrated with an indignation that had now become wholly righteous and
impersonal–was the expression of the disapproval of Society itself. "If ever I
hear again of any lapse from a proper standard of infantile decorum, I shall
ask for your transference to a Sub–Centre–preferably to Iceland. Good
morning." And swivelling round in his chair, he picked up his pen and began to
write.</p><p>"That'll teach him," he said to himself. But he was mistaken. For Bernard
left the room with a swagger, exulting, as he banged the door behind him, in
the thought that he stood alone, embattled against the order of things; elated
by the intoxicating consciousness of his individual significance and
importance. Even the thought of persecution left him undismayed, was rather
tonic than depressing. He felt strong enough to meet and overcome affliction,
strong enough to face even Iceland. And this confidence was the greater for
his not for a moment really believing that he would be called upon to face
anything at all. People simply weren't transferred for things like that.
Iceland was just a threat. A most stimulating and life–giving threat. Walking
along the corridor, he actually whistled.</p><p>Heroic was the account he gave that evening of his interview with the
D.H.C. "Whereupon," it concluded, "I simply told him to go to the Bottomless
Past and marched out of the room. And that was that." He looked at Helmholtz
Watson expectantly, awaiting his due reward of sympathy, encouragement,
admiration. But no word came. Helmholtz sat silent, staring at the floor.</p><p>He liked Bernard; he was grateful to him for being the only man of his
acquaintance with whom he could talk about the subjects he felt to be
important. Nevertheless, there were things in Bernard which he hated. This
boasting, for example. And the outbursts of an abject self–pity with which it
alternated. And his deplorable habit of being bold after the event, and full,
in absence, of the most extraordinary presence of mind. He hated these
things–just because he liked Bernard. The seconds passed. Helmholtz continued
to stare at the floor. And suddenly Bernard blushed and turned away.</p></section><footer/></body></html>