<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>§ 1</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch06.xhtml" title="Chapter Six"/><link rel="next" href="ch06s02.xhtml" title="§ 2"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="§ 1" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70174353001960"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">§ 1</h2></div></div></div><p>Odd, odd, <span class="emphasis"><em>odd</em></span>, was Lenina's verdict on Bernard
Marx. So odd, indeed, that in the course of the succeeding weeks she had
wondered more than once whether she shouldn't change her mind about the New
Mexico holiday, and go instead to the North Pole with Benito Hoover. The
trouble was that she knew the North Pole, had been there with George Edzel
only last summer, and what was more, found it pretty grim. Nothing to do, and
the hotel too hopelessly old–fashioned–no television laid on in the bedrooms,
no scent organ, only the most putrid synthetic music, and not more than
twenty–five Escalator–Squash Courts for over two hundred guests. No, decidedly
she couldn't face the North Pole again. Added to which, she had only been to
America once before. And even then, how inadequately! A cheap week–end in New
York–had it been with Jean–Jacques Habibullah or Bokanovsky Jones? She
couldn't remember. Anyhow, it was of absolutely no importance. The prospect of
flying West again, and for a whole week, was very inviting. Moreover, for at
least three days of that week they would be in the Savage Reservation. Not
more than half a dozen people in the whole Centre had ever been inside a
Savage Reservation. As an Alpha–Plus psychologist, Bernard was one of the few
men she knew entitled to a permit. For Lenina, the opportunity was unique. And
yet, so unique also was Bernard's oddness that she had hesitated to take it,
had actually thought of risking the Pole again with funny old Benito. At least
Benito was normal. Whereas Bernard…</p><p>"Alcohol in his blood–surrogate," was Fanny's explanation of every
eccentricity. But Henry, with whom, one evening when they were in bed
together, Lenina had rather anxiously discussed her new lover, Henry had
compared poor Bernard to a rhinoceros.</p><p>"You can't teach a rhinoceros tricks," he had explained in his brief and
vigorous style. "Some men are almost rhinoceroses; they don't respond properly
to conditioning. Poor Devils! Bernard's one of them. Luckily for him, he's
pretty good at his job. Otherwise the Director would never have kept him.
However," he added consolingly, "I think he's pretty harmless."</p><p>Pretty harmless, perhaps; but also pretty disquieting. That mania, to
start with, for doing things in private. Which meant, in practice, not doing
anything at all. For what was there that one <span class="emphasis"><em>could</em></span> do in private.
(Apart, of course, from going to bed: but one couldn't do that all the time.)
Yes, what <span class="emphasis"><em>was</em></span> there? Precious little. The first afternoon they went out
together was particularly fine. Lenina had suggested a swim at Toquay Country
Club followed by dinner at the Oxford Union. But Bernard thought there would
be too much of a crowd. Then what about a round of Electro–magnetic Golf at
St. Andrew's? But again, no: Bernard considered that Electro–magnetic Golf was
a waste of time.</p><p>"Then what's time for?" asked Lenina in some astonishment.</p><p>Apparently, for going walks in the Lake District; for that was what he now
proposed. Land on the top of Skiddaw and walk for a couple of hours in the
heather. "Alone with you, Lenina."</p><p>"But, Bernard, we shall be alone all night."</p><p>Bernard blushed and looked away. "I meant, alone for talking," he mumbled.</p><p>"Talking? But what about?" Walking and talking–that seemed a very odd way
of spending an afternoon.</p><p>In the end she persuaded him, much against his will, to fly over to
Amsterdam to see the Semi–Demi–Finals of the Women's Heavyweight Wrestling
Championship.</p><p>"In a crowd," he grumbled. "As usual." He remained obstinately gloomy the
whole afternoon; wouldn't talk to Lenina's friends (of whom they met dozens in
the ice–cream <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span> bar between the wrestling bouts); and in spite of
his misery absolutely refused to take the half–gramme raspberry sundae which
she pressed upon him. "I'd rather be myself," he said. "Myself and nasty. Not
somebody else, however jolly."</p><p>"A gramme in time saves nine," said Lenina, producing a bright treasure of
sleep–taught wisdom. Bernard pushed away the proffered glass impatiently.</p><p>"Now don't lose your temper," she said. "Remember one cubic centimetre
cures ten gloomy sentiments."</p><p>"Oh, for Ford's sake, be quiet!" he shouted.</p><p>Lenina shrugged her shoulders. "A gramme is always better than a damn,"
she concluded with dignity, and drank the sundae herself.</p><p>On their way back across the Channel, Bernard insisted on stopping his
propeller and hovering on his helicopter screws within a hundred feet of the
waves. The weather had taken a change for the worse; a south–westerly wind had
sprung up, the sky was cloudy.</p><p>"Look," he commanded.</p><p>"But it's horrible," said Lenina, shrinking back from the window. She was
appalled by the rushing emptiness of the night, by the black foam–flecked
water heaving beneath them, by the pale face of the moon, so haggard and
distracted among the hastening clouds. "Let's turn on the radio. Quick!" She
reached for the dialling knob on the dash–board and turned it at random.</p><p>"…skies are blue inside of you," sang sixteen tremoloing falsettos, "the
weather's always…"</p><p>Then a hiccough and silence. Bernard had switched off the current.</p><p>"I want to look at the sea in peace," he said. "One can't even look with
that beastly noise going on."</p><p>"But it's lovely. And I don't want to look."</p><p>"But I do," he insisted. "It makes me feel as though…" he hesitated,
searching for words with which to express himself, "as though I were more
<span class="emphasis"><em>me</em></span>, if you see what I mean. More on my own, not so completely a part of
something else. Not just a cell in the social body. Doesn't it make you feel
like that, Lenina?"</p><p>But Lenina was crying. "It's horrible, it's horrible," she kept repeating.
"And how can you talk like that about not wanting to be a part of the social
body? After all, every one works for every one else. We can't do without any
one. Even Epsilons…"</p><p>"Yes, I know," said Bernard derisively. "'Even Epsilons are useful'! So am
I. And I damned well wish I weren't!"</p><p>Lenina was shocked by his blasphemy. "Bernard!" She protested in a voice
of amazed distress. "How can you?"</p><p>In a different key, "How can I?" he repeated meditatively. "No, the real
problem is: How is it that I can't, or rather–because, after all, I know quite
well why I can't–what would it be like if I could, if I were free–not enslaved
by my conditioning."</p><p>"But, Bernard, you're saying the most awful things."</p><p>"Don't you wish you were free, Lenina?"</p><p>"I don't know what you mean. I am free. Free to have the most wonderful
time. Everybody's happy nowadays."</p><p>He laughed, "Yes, 'Everybody's happy nowadays.' We begin giving the
children that at five. But wouldn't you like to be free to be happy in some
other way, Lenina? In your own way, for example; not in everybody else's way."</p><p>"I don't know what you mean," she repeated. Then, turning to him, "Oh, do
let's go back, Bernard," she besought; "I do so hate it here."</p><p>"Don't you like being with me?"</p><p>"But of course, Bernard. It's this horrible place."</p><p>"I thought we'd be more…more <span class="emphasis"><em>together</em></span> here–with nothing but the
sea and moon. More together than in that crowd, or even in my rooms. Don't you
understand that?"</p><p>"I don't understand anything," she said with decision, determined to
preserve her incomprehension intact. "Nothing. Least of all," she continued in
another tone "why you don't take <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span> when you have these dreadful
ideas of yours. You'd forget all about them. And instead of feeling miserable,
you'd be jolly. <span class="emphasis"><em>So</em></span> jolly," she repeated and smiled, for all the puzzled
anxiety in her eyes, with what was meant to be an inviting and voluptuous
cajolery.</p><p>He looked at her in silence, his face unresponsive and very grave–looked
at her intently. After a few seconds Lenina's eyes flinched away; she uttered
a nervous little laugh, tried to think of something to say and couldn't. The
silence prolonged itself.</p><p>When Bernard spoke at last, it was in a small tired voice. "All right
then," he said, "we'll go back." And stepping hard on the accelerator, he sent
the machine rocketing up into the sky. At four thousand he started his
propeller. They flew in silence for a minute or two. Then, suddenly, Bernard
began to laugh. Rather oddly, Lenina thought, but still, it was laughter.</p><p>"Feeling better?" she ventured to ask.</p><p>For answer, he lifted one hand from the controls and, slipping his arm
around her, began to fondle her breasts.</p><p>"Thank Ford," she said to herself, "he's all right again."</p><p>Half an hour later they were back in his rooms. Bernard swallowed four
tablets of <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span> at a gulp, turned on the radio and television and began
to undress.</p><p>"Well," Lenina enquired, with significant archness when they met next
afternoon on the roof, "did you think it was fun yesterday?"</p><p>Bernard nodded. They climbed into the plane. A little jolt, and they were
off.</p><p>"Every one says I'm awfully pneumatic," said Lenina reflectively, patting
her own legs.</p><p>"Awfully." But there was an expression of pain in Bernard's eyes. "Like
meat," he was thinking.</p><p>She looked up with a certain anxiety. "But you don't think I'm <span class="emphasis"><em>too</em></span>
plump, do you?"</p><p>He shook his head. Like so much meat.</p><p>"You think I'm all right." Another nod. "In every way?"</p><p>"Perfect," he said aloud. And inwardly. "She thinks of herself that way.
She doesn't mind being meat."</p><p>Lenina smiled triumphantly. But her satisfaction was premature.</p><p>"All the same," he went on, after a little pause, "I still rather wish it
had all ended differently."</p><p>"Differently?" Were there other endings?</p><p>"I didn't want it to end with our going to bed," he specified.</p><p>Lenina was astonished.</p><p>"Not at once, not the first day."</p><p>"But then what…?"</p><p>He began to talk a lot of incomprehensible and dangerous nonsense. Lenina
did her best to stop the ears of her mind; but every now and then a phrase
would insist on becoming audible. "…to try the effect of arresting my
impulses," she heard him say. The words seemed to touch a spring in her mind.</p><p>"Never put off till to–morrow the fun you can have to–day," she said
gravely.</p><p>"Two hundred repetitions, twice a week from fourteen to sixteen and a
half," was all his comment. The mad bad talk rambled on. "I want to know what
passion is," she heard him saying. "I want to feel something strongly."</p><p>"When the individual feels, the community reels," Lenina pronounced.</p><p>"Well, why shouldn't it reel a bit?"</p><p>"Bernard!"</p><p>But Bernard remained unabashed.</p><p>"Adults intellectually and during working hours," he went on. "Infants
where feeling and desire are concerned."</p><p>"Our Ford loved infants."</p><p>Ignoring the interruption. "It suddenly struck me the other day,"
continued Bernard, "that it might be possible to be an adult all the time."</p><p>"I don't understand." Lenina's tone was firm.</p><p>"I know you don't. And that's why we went to bed together yesterday–like
infants–instead of being adults and waiting."</p><p>"But it was fun," Lenina insisted. "Wasn't it?"</p><p>"Oh, the greatest fun," he answered, but in a voice so mournful, with an
expression so profoundly miserable, that Lenina felt all her triumph suddenly
evaporate. Perhaps he had found her too plump, after all.</p><p>"I told you so," was all that Fanny said, when Lenina came and made her
confidences. "It's the alcohol they put in his surrogate."</p><p>"All the same," Lenina insisted. "I do like him. He has such awfully nice
hands. And the way he moves his shoulders–that's very attractive." She sighed.
"But I wish he weren't so odd."</p></section><footer/></body></html>