<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>§ 3</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch06s02.xhtml" title="§ 2"/><link rel="next" href="ch07.xhtml" title="Chapter Seven"/></head><body><header/><section class="section" title="§ 3" epub:type="subchapter" id="id70174352940400"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="title" style="clear: both">§ 3</h2></div></div></div><p>The journey was quite uneventful. The Blue Pacific
Rocket was two and a half minutes early at New Orleans, lost four minutes in a
tornado over Texas, but flew into a favourable air current at Longitude 95
West, and was able to land at Santa Fé less than forty seconds behind schedule
time.</p><p>"Forty seconds on a six and a half hour flight. Not so bad," Lenina
conceded.</p><p>They slept that night at Santa Fé. The hotel was excellent–incomparably
better, for example, than that horrible Aurora Bora Palace in which Lenina had
suffered so much the previous summer. Liquid air, television, vibro–vacuum
massage, radio, boiling caffeine solution, hot contraceptives, and eight
different kinds of scent were laid on in every bedroom. The synthetic music
plant was working as they entered the hall and left nothing to be desired. A
notice in the lift announced that there were sixty Escalator–Squash–Racket
Courts in the hotel, and that Obstacle and Electro–magnetic Golf could both be
played in the park.</p><p>"But it sounds simply too lovely," cried Lenina. "I almost wish we could
stay here. Sixty Escalator–Squash Courts…"</p><p>"There won't be any in the Reservation," Bernard warned her. "And no
scent, no television, no hot water even. If you feel you can't stand it, stay
here till I come back."</p><p>Lenina was quite offended. "Of course I can stand it. I only said it was
lovely here because…well, because progress <span class="emphasis"><em>is</em></span> lovely, isn't it?"</p><p>"Five hundred repetitions once a week from thirteen to seventeen," said
Bernard wearily, as though to himself.</p><p>"What did you say?"</p><p>"I said that progress was lovely. That's why you mustn't come to the
Reservation unless you really want to."</p><p>"But I do want to."</p><p>"Very well, then," said Bernard; and it was almost a threat.</p><p>Their permit required the signature of the Warden of the Reservation, at
whose office next morning they duly presented themselves. An Epsilon–Plus
negro porter took in Bernard's card, and they were admitted almost
immediately.</p><p>The Warden was a blond and brachycephalic Alpha–Minus, short, red,
moon–faced, and broad–shouldered, with a loud booming voice, very well adapted
to the utterance of hypnopædic wisdom. He was a mine of irrelevant information
and unasked–for good advice. Once started, he went on and on–boomingly.</p><p>"…five hundred and sixty thousand square kilometres, divided into four
distinct Sub–Reservations, each surrounded by a high–tension wire fence."</p><p>At this moment, and for no apparent reason, Bernard suddenly remembered
that he had left the Eau de Cologne tap in his bathroom wide open and running.</p><p>"…supplied with current from the Grand Canyon hydro–electric station."</p><p>"Cost me a fortune by the time I get back." With his mind's eye, Bernard
saw the needle on the scent meter creeping round and round, antlike,
indefatigable. "Quickly telephone to Helmholtz Watson."</p><p>"…upwards of five thousand kilometres of fencing at sixty thousand
volts."</p><p>"You don't say so," said Lenina politely, not knowing in the least what
the Warden had said, but taking her cue from his dramatic pause. When the
Warden started booming, she had inconspicuously swallowed half a gramme of
<span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>, with the result that she could now sit, serenely not listening,
thinking of nothing at all, but with her large blue eyes fixed on the Warden's
face in an expression of rapt attention.</p><p>"To touch the fence is instant death," pronounced the Warden solemnly.
"There is no escape from a Savage Reservation."</p><p>The word "escape" was suggestive. "Perhaps," said Bernard, half rising,
"we ought to think of going." The little black needle was scurrying, an
insect, nibbling through time, eating into his money.</p><p>"No escape," repeated the Warden, waving him back into his chair; and as
the permit was not yet countersigned Bernard had no choice but to obey. "Those
who are born in the Reservation–and remember, my dear young lady," he added,
leering obscenely at Lenina, and speaking in an improper whisper, "remember
that, in the Reservation, children still <span class="emphasis"><em>are</em></span> born, yes, actually born,
revolting as that may seem…" (He hoped that this reference to a shameful
subject would make Lenina blush; but she only smiled with simulated
intelligence and said, "You don't say so!" Disappointed, the Warden began
again. ) "Those, I repeat who are born in the Reservation are destined to die
there."</p><p>Destined to die…A decilitre of Eau de Cologne every minute. Six litres
an hour. "Perhaps," Bernard tried again, "we ought…"</p><p>Leaning forward, the Warden tapped the table with his forefinger. "You ask
me how many people live in the Reservation. And I reply"–triumphantly–"I reply
that we do not know. We can only guess."</p><p>"You don't say so."</p><p>"My dear young lady, I do say so."</p><p>Six times twenty–four–no, it would be nearer six times thirty–six. Bernard
was pale and trembling with impatience. But inexorably the booming continued.</p><p>"…about sixty thousand Indians and half–breeds…absolute savages…our
inspectors occasionally visit…otherwise, no communication whatever with the
civilized world…still preserve their repulsive habits and customs…
marriage, if you know what that is, my dear young lady; families…no
conditioning…monstrous superstitions…Christianity and totemism and
ancestor worship…extinct languages, such as Zuñi and Spanish and
Athapascan…pumas, porcupines and other ferocious animals…infectious
diseases…priests…venomous lizards…"</p><p>"You don't say so?"</p><p>They got away at last. Bernard dashed to the telephone. Quick, quick; but
it took him nearly three minutes to get on to Helmholtz Watson. "We might be
among the savages already," he complained. "Damned incompetence!"</p><p>"Have a gramme," suggested Lenina.</p><p>He refused, preferring his anger. And at last, thank Ford, he was through
and, yes, it was Helmholtz; Helmholtz, to whom he explained what had happened,
and who promised to go round at once, at once, and turn off the tap, yes, at
once, but took this opportunity to tell him what the D.H.C. had said, in
public, yesterday evening…</p><p>"What? He's looking out for some one to take my place?" Bernard's voice
was agonized. "So it's actually decided? Did he mention Iceland? You say he
did? Ford! Iceland…" He hung up the receiver and turned back to Lenina. His
face was pale, his expression utterly dejected.</p><p>"What's the matter?" she asked.</p><p>"The matter?" He dropped heavily into a chair. "I'm going to be sent to
Iceland."</p><p>Often in the past he had wondered what it would be like to be subjected
(<span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>–less and with nothing but his own inward resources to rely on) to
some great trial, some pain, some persecution; he had even longed for
affliction. As recently as a week ago, in the Director's office, he had
imagined himself courageously resisting, stoically accepting suffering without
a word. The Director's threats had actually elated him, made him feel larger
than life. But that, as he now realized, was because he had not taken the
threats quite seriously, he had not believed that, when it came to the point,
the D.H.C. would ever do anything. Now that it looked as though the threats
were really to be fulfilled, Bernard was appalled. Of that imagined stoicism,
that theoretical courage, not a trace was left.</p><p>He raged against himself–what a fool!–against the Director–how unfair not
to give him that other chance, that other chance which, he now had no doubt at
all, he had always intended to take. And Iceland, Iceland…</p><p>Lenina shook her head. "Was and will make me ill," she quoted, "I take a
gramme and only am."</p><p>In the end she persuaded him to swallow four tablets of <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span>. Five
minutes later roots and fruits were abolished; the flower of the present
rosily blossomed. A message from the porter announced that, at the Warden's
orders, a Reservation Guard had come round with a plane and was waiting on the
roof of the hotel. They went up at once. An octoroon in Gamma–green uniform
saluted and proceeded to recite the morning's programme.</p><p>A bird's–eye view of ten or a dozen of the principal pueblos, then a
landing for lunch in the valley of Malpais. The rest–house was comfortable
there, and up at the pueblo the savages would probably be celebrating their
summer festival. It would be the best place to spend the night.</p><p>They took their seats in the plane and set off. Ten minutes later they
were crossing the frontier that separated civilization from savagery. Uphill
and down, across the deserts of salt or sand, through forests, into the violet
depth of canyons, over crag and peak and table–topped mesa, the fence marched
on and on, irresistibly the straight line, the geometrical symbol of
triumphant human purpose. And at its foot, here and there, a mosaic of white
bones, a still unrotted carcase dark on the tawny ground marked the place
where deer or steer, puma or porcupine or coyote, or the greedy turkey
buzzards drawn down by the whiff of carrion and fulminated as though by a
poetic justice, had come too close to the destroying wires.</p><p>"They never learn," said the green–uniformed pilot, pointing down at the
skeletons on the ground below them. "And they never will learn," he added and
laughed, as though he had somehow scored a personal triumph over the
electrocuted animals.</p><p>Bernard also laughed; after two grammes of <span class="emphasis"><em>soma</em></span> the joke seemed,
for some reason, good. Laughed and then, almost immediately, dropped off to
sleep, and sleeping was carried over Taos and Tesuque; over Nambe and Picuris
and Pojoaque, over Sia and Cochiti, over Laguna and Acoma and the Enchanted
Mesa, over Zuñi and Cibola and Ojo Caliente, and woke at last to find the
machine standing on the ground, Lenina carrying the suit–cases into a small
square house, and the Gamma–green octoroon talking incomprehensibly with a
young Indian.</p><p>"Malpais," explained the pilot, as Bernard stepped out. "This is the
rest–house. And there's a dance this afternoon at the pueblo. He'll take you
there." He pointed to the sullen young savage. "Funny, I expect." He grinned.
"Everything they do is funny." And with that he climbed into the plane and
started up the engines. "Back to–morrow. And remember," he added reassuringly
to Lenina, "they're perfectly tame; savages won't do you any harm. They've got
enough experience of gas bombs to know that they mustn't play any tricks."
Still laughing, he threw the helicopter screws into gear, accelerated, and was
gone.</p></section><footer/></body></html>